---
layout: post
title: OME's position regarding file formats
categories: future-plans community file-formats
---


<!-- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/41481100/add-padding-or-margin-broke-float -->
<!-- https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/q/quotes/ -->
<style type="text/css">

blockquote {
    font-size: 160%;
    margin-left: -3rem;
    margin-right: -3rem;
    padding-right: 1rem;
    padding-left: 1rem;
    font-style: italic;
    border-left: none;
}

.figure-right {
  float: right;
  width: 25%;
  box-sizing: border-box;
  padding: 10px;
}
.figure-right-image {
  max-width: 90%;
}
.figure-left {
  float: left;
  width: 25%;
  box-sizing: border-box;
  padding: 10px;
}
.figure-left-image {
  max-width: 90%;
}
.clearfix {
  clear: both;
}
</style>

<i style="font-size: 95%">
Below is a statement delivered November 2018 to the Euro-Bioimaging Industry
Board regarding the support of proprietary file formats by Bio-Formats. This
was discussed during the From Images to Knowledge with ImageJ & Friends meeting
in December and since then, there have been a growing number of conversations
about a common format for bioimaging data. We're posting it here to tie the
conversations back together and continue an open discussion of this critical
issue.
</i>

{% include caption.html
    url="/images/2019/growth-formats.png"
    file="/images/2019/growth-formats.png"
    description="Growth of file format readers (2006-2018)"
    class="figure-right" %}

As many of you know, work on Bio-Formats began in 2006, and over the first 10
years of development, support was added for over 140 file formats. If you
include the per-format variants that have emerged over the years, that might be
as much as 5 or 10 times higher, but precise numbers are difficult at best.

{% include caption.html
    url="/images/2019/complex-formats.png"
    file="/images/2019/complex-formats.png"
    description="Statement about format complexity (2016)"
    class="figure-left" %}

In 2016, we issued [a public
statement](https://blog.openmicroscopy.org/file-formats/community/2016/01/06/format-support/)
that OME, or more specifically its funding model, was not going to keep up with
the accelerated development of new formats. We warned that we would be spending
less time on closed formats, and we suggested that format developers either
move to open formats or invest their own time or money to support their

How did that turn out? Well, two years later the growth curve has naturally
levelled off as we pursue other priorities. Currently there are just over 150
formats supported. One company, 3i, has taken over support of their own file
format
([Slidebook6](https://www.intelligent-imaging.com/technical-answers#SLDinFIJI))
with a closed source reader that lives outside of Bio-Formats.

A few other companies have added support for their format either by
contributing directly to the library or by commissioning Glencoe Software to
doing so. Where necessary the open source team has added support for formats
that are needed for their funded priorities like datasets published in the
Image Data Resource (https://idr.openmicroscopy.org/search/?query=Name:idr0019,
https://idr.openmicroscopy.org/search/?query=Name:idr0020,
https://idr.openmicroscopy.org/search/?query=Name:idr0037,
https://idr.openmicroscopy.org/search/?query=Name:idr0044 )

But paying for the initial cost of a format is not enough. The need for
indefinite support carries a larger, longer-lived price tag that leaves data
written in a given format constantly at risk. These costs are exacerbated by
format variants. Even when a format is defined following standards like DICOM,
there is a need to contend with multiple implementations. For instance,
Bio-Formats is currently supporting xxx variants of DICOM files in the
radiology domain.

For example in 2017, we added support for  the Olympus OIR format in
partnership with Olympus Europe. Following public release, the community has
periodically reported breakages caused by new variants of the format
(https://www.openmicroscopy.org/community/viewtopic.php?f=13&t=8360,
https://www.openmicroscopy.org/community/viewtopic.php?f=13&t=8362,
https://www.openmicroscopy.org/community/viewtopic.php?f=13&t=8522,
https://list.nih.gov/cgi-bin/wa.exe?A2=IMAGEJ;c77987bc.1807,
https://forum.image.sc/t/problems-opening-olympus-oir-files-using-bio-formats/24747
).

<blockquote>Put simply, the format landscape has scaled beyond a manageable level.</blockquote>

Put simply, the format landscape has scaled beyond a manageable level. The
result is that scientists end up blocked in accessing and properly handling
their data, and thus blocked in their scientific endeavor. If Bio-Formats were
to cease to exist, a large percentage of imaging data would immediately cease
to be accessible at least until someone took on the burden of support.

We understand the push to develop new formats. From numerous interactions, we
know how critical both the speed at which data producers need to write as well
as that at which users need to access their data are -- and that across as many
platforms as possible. We also know that, optimally, this ecosystem should all
just keep working for years to come. But while these requirements need to be
fulfilled, something must give.

We think the only scalable way forward is to work together on an ever smaller
number of formats. That's why we've been concentrating on open formats instead
of adding new proprietary formats. For example, [Bio-Formats
6.1](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/2019/05/20/bio-formats-6-1-0.html) adds
support for the open BigDataViewer (BDV) format, a strong candidate for support
across the community.

BDV provides a testbed for moving beyond the current single binary format of
OME-TIFF. The OME Model will be extended to permit describing the multiscale,
multidimensional data that is currently stored in BDV XML/H5. As a stable
container format, HDF5 allows us a quick way to validate these concepts.

At the same time there's a consensus that HDF5 itself as currently implemented
cannot be the only binary container for our community, and, therefore, we are
also collaborating on next-generation open-source, chunked (or “cloud”) formats
for the scale of data generated by future acquisition systems. Two candidates —
[Zarr](http://zarr-developers.github.io) and
[N5](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5) — were independently developed but
overlap in most of their core concepts. Both communities have since begun
work on a common storage spec that we can all get behind.

We'd like to see a community agreement between the various parties on a minimal
set of open formats covering a broad range of imaging modalities. We need to
reduce long-term cost of our domain's file formats and their variants. We want
data users and producers to be able to ensure the long-term viability of their
data.

OME-TIFF has been available for over a decade and is today in use in various
software both on the industry and academic side, minimally as an export format.
As the underlying binary container format solidifies, we foresee providing the
same type of continuous migration between versions.

Some of this work is the regular business of maintaining Bio-Formats, but
clearly this is a larger effort that could use more collaboration and funding.
We are considering an application to the CZI [call for open source
projects](https://chanzuckerberg.com/newsroom/czi-announces-support-for-open-source-software-efforts-to-improve-biomedical-imaging/)
and welcome any coordinated efforts. Beyond that call, a truly common format
will need indefinite support, and we will continue to look for avenues to do
that.

In the following weeks, we'll post more material, hopefully in a format that
others can easily contribute to.
